# PTL.PRS

This R package helps users to construct multi-ethnic polygenic risk score (PRS) using transfer learning when the individual level data is not available. It can help predict PRS of small group using summary statistics from larger group resources.

This package contains a main function: `PTL_PRS_bwes` for train, `TL_PRS_test` for test, and `pseudo_split` for pseudo splitting.

## Installation
`PTL.PRS` requires the software 'plink' as well as the following R packages:  `data.table`, `lassosum`, `Rcpp` and `parallel`. Install them by: 

```r
install.packages(c("data.table", "lassosum", "parallel", "Rcpp"), dependencies=TRUE)
```

If you have `devtools`, you can type: 
```r
install_github("bokeumcho/PTL.PRS")
```
for the latest development version. Or you can clone the latest development version here and install yourself using `devtools`. 


## Inputs of PTL_PRS
1. `ref_file`: 
   The prefix of the PLINK file for the reference panel data in the target population. This file is used to estimate the LD matrix during training and validation steps.

2. `ref_file_ps`: 
   The prefix of the PLINK file for the reference panel data in the target population used to generate pseudo-summary statistics. This can be the same file as `ref_file`, but the model is more reliable when using a different file.

3. `sum_stats_file`: 
   The file path for the effect size data. This file can be generated by existing PRS methods, such as Lassosum or PRS-CS. It contains the following columns: `SNP`, `CHR`, `A1`, `Beta`, where:
   - `SNP`: SNPID (same format as SNPID in PLINK files)
   - `CHR`: Chromosome number
   - `A1`: Alternative (effect) allele
   - `Beta`: Effect size

4. `target_sumstats_file`: 
   The file path for the summary statistics in the target population. This file must contain the following columns: `SNP`, `A1`, `beta`, `p`, and `N`, where:
   - `beta`: Effect size from summary statistics or its signs
   - `p`: p-value
   - `N`: Sample size used for summary statistics calculation
   Alternatively, the file can include a `cor` column instead of `beta` and `p`, representing the correlation between genotype and phenotype.

   > **Note:** This file is used to generate pseudo-summary statistics.

5. `LDblocks`: 
   Defines LD regions using the definitions by Berisa and Pickrell (2015) for the hg19 genome in the target population. Currently supported options are:
   - `EUR.hg19` (European)
   - `AFR.hg19` (African)
   - `ASN.hg19` (Asian)

6. `outfile`: 
   The prefix for the output file location. This will be used to store final output files.

7. `cluster`: 
   A cluster object from the `parallel` package for parallel computing.

8. `lr_list` (optional): 
   A grid of learning rates used for hyperparameter tuning. If not specified, a default value is calculated as:
   - \[ min( 1, 10, 100, 1000, 5000, 10000 / n(SNPs), 1 ) \]

9. `iter` (optional): 
   Maximum number of iterations for early stopping during training. Default value is 200 if not specified.

10. `ps`: 
    Pseudo-summary generation flag.

11. `subprop`: 
    Proportion of training samples in full summary statistics.

## Outputs of PTL_PRS
1. `best.learning.rate`: 
the learning rate we can use in order to achieve the best risk prediction.

2. `best.iteration`: 
the number of iterations we should stop in order to achieve the best risk prediction.

3. `best.beta`: 
the data frame containing three columns: "SNP","A1","beta". Note that this is the best effect size we can use to construct PRS, selected using best.learning.rate and best.iteration.  

4. `param_table`: 
the data frame containing a grid of candidates of learning rates and the number of iterations that we consider. 

## Example R script
You can download the files in Dropbox folder here (https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fo/xsm783tn8mt7h0vovhjwa/ABSam-2r6i-f3P1ED_rTRuM?rlkey=7zgkyrvnzu8rc78tnuolmmtcw&st=s5amjvco&dl=0) to run the example R script.

```r
library(data.table)
library(lassosum)
library(parallel)
library(Rcpp)
library(ROCR)

library(PTL.PRS)

# setwd("bokeum/Example_data_PTL.PRS")  ###setup your work path.
setwd("/media/leelabsg-storage1/bokeum/example_data")

ref_file = '1kg_SAS_ref' 
ref_file_ps = '1kg_SAS_ref'

num_cores = 2
pseudo_test=FALSE
random_seed=42

sum_stats_file = 't2d_prscs_EUR.pgs' # extracted chromosome 22 SNPs from t2d prscs weights file
target_sumstats_file = 'tr_val.summaries' 

LDblocks="ASN.hg19"
outfile=paste0("Output_PTLPRS") 


lr_list = c(1,10,100,1000) #default
iter = 100

ps=TRUE
subprop=0.9

patience = 3 #default = 3
trace=TRUE

target_sumstats_train_file = NULL 
target_sumstats_val_file = NULL 

system.time({
    out.beta = PTL_PRS_bwes(ref_file, sum_stats_file, target_sumstats_file, subprop, ref_file_ps, LDblocks, outfile, num_cores, target_sumstats_train_file, target_sumstats_val_file, ps, pseudo_test, random_seed, lr_list, iter, patience, trace)
})

### TEST ###
plink_file = '1kg_SAS_all'
by_chr = FALSE

ped_test_file='test_ped.txt'

Y_name="Y"
Ytype='B'
Covar_name="sex"

system.time({
TL_PRS_test(plink_file, by_chr, ped_test_file, outfile, Ytype, Covar_name,Y_name)
})
```

## Support
If there are any further questions or problems with running or installing `PTL.PRS`, please do email me at <bokeum1810@snu.ac.kr>. 
